Hi there.
This is the model room.
Before moving on, let's now spend some time understanding how Java came into existence.
Compared to languages like C and C++, Java has some unique features and there's a certain motivation
behind creating Java with those features.
So understanding the motivation will help us better appreciate the features that Java offers.
So let's go ahead and learn the story behind Java's creation.
You must have heard of Sun Microsystems, which was a well-known Silicon Valley based company which
got acquired by Oracle in 2010.
In 1991, having been in business for almost a decade selling Unix based computers, Sun wanted to see
what the next wave in computing was.
So they're assembled a small team to brainstorm on this and they name the team as the green team.
The Green team's initial conclusion was that a network of heterogeneous consumer devices communicating
with each other could be one significant trend.
And these devices are small, they are reliable, distributed, real time embedded systems.
And based on this initial conclusion, they decided to build a prototype as part of a new project called
The Green Project.
So it is a green team working on the Green Project.
The vision for this project was to build an interactive wireless handheld device, which would communicate
with home entertainment devices like TV and VCR.
As we see here in this illustration.
And the software that the green team develops would be installed on all of these devices.
And the technology was expected to help in doing stuff like playing a certain TV channel or recording
a particular favorite program, which is common these days, but not in early nineties.
In fact, you can see that there's a VCR in this illustration as there were no DVDs back in early nineties.
However, realizing this vision was pretty challenging as it had some unique goals.
And let's see what those goals are.
First goal is that the software should consume less memory as the target consumer devices are embedded
devices which have limited resources like memory.
Next.
The technology should allow these devices to communicate with each other and also pass around any software
programs.
And this leads to the third and one of the most important goals, which is platform independence.
So when these software programs are delivered from one device to another, they should run on the target
device without any issues.
That is, the hardware and operating system of the target device should not cause any issues.
And that's basically platform independence.
Similarly, when software programs are delivered to the target devices, they should not cause any harm
to those devices.
So security is critical.
Finally, the software should support Multithreading so that the devices can perform multiple activities
at the same time.
For instance, if a program is being downloaded from another consumer device, then the current device
might want to perform some other activity while the program is being downloaded.
Initially C++ was considered for this project, but it was rejected as it did not meet some of the project
goals which we just discussed, and platform independence was one of them.
So that team decided to create a brand new technology.
Then one of the team members, James Gosling, created an entirely new language and named it as Oak
after the tree outside his office, of course, later renamed to Java due to trademark issues.
So Gosling is regarded as the father of Java.
Soon the Green team came up with a working demo on the interactive handheld device, was called as Star
seven.
And it's interesting to note that this was way back in 92 and Star seven already had a touch screen
with features similar to today's smartphones.
Just Google for Gosling Star seven and you should be able to find an old video of James Gosling demonstrating
Star seven.
It is definitely worth watching.
Some targeted the cable TV industry to sell this product, but the technology was far too advanced for
them, and hence the project did not meet success.
But Sanson soon that the newly popular World Wide Web was exactly identical to the Green Project that
is a network of heterogeneous systems communicating with each other as shown in this illustration.
As you can see, we have Windows clients talking to Linux servers and similarly Linux clients talking
to Windows servers.
Before Java came into existence.
In turn, it involved moving around only static HTML content on Sun believed that by integrating Java
they can make web pages more interactive.
So Sun developed a browser called Hot Java and they showcased it at the Sun World Conference in 1995.
And the browser allowed Java programs called applets to be embedded in HTML pages, and this would allow
web applications to be interactive.
But for this to work, the client's browser should install Java, and the way it would work is that
an HTML page would include HTML tags corresponding to applets, and the applets would actually reside
on some remote server and web browser processes, a HTML page.
And when it encounters these applet related tags, it will then download the corresponding applets from
the remote server and then execute them as it already has Java installed.
Knowledge html content same applet can run on heterogeneous client platforms that is platform independence.
Capability of HTML pages is still supported.
That is, the applet might be on a Linux server and the client's browser might be on a Windows machine,
but the downloaded applet from the Linux server would execute without any issues within the client's
browser on the Windows machine.
At the same conference, Netscape also announced that their popular Netscape Navigator browser would
include Java support.
And with that, the entire tech industry was very excited about the Java technology as this integration
could be very big for the future of Internet.
And soon the first version of Java was released in January of 1996.
So that's a brief history of Java.
Always keep in mind that Java was mainly designed to work in a networked environment consisting of heterogeneous
consumer devices.
The environment had some unique goals and that led to the development of Java, though it could not
be adopted in the cable TV industry.
It eventually found its success with the World Wide Web, and especially it soon evolved as a popular
language for developing large scale web applications.
Standard on desktop applications and mobile applications.
Thank you.